Course Syllabus for "CS201: Elementary Data Structures"
-------------------------------------------------------

When we use programming for problem-solving purposes, data must be
stored in certain forms, or Data Structures, so that operations on that
data will yield a specific type of output.  Imagine, for example, that a
non-profit is having trouble staying afloat and needs an increase in
donation.  It decides it wants to keep track of its donors in a program
in order to figure out who is contributing and why.  You would first
need to define the properties that would define those donors: name,
address, amount donated, date of donation, and so on.  Then, when the
non-profit wants to determine how to best reach out to their donors, it
can create a model of the average donor that contributes to the
non-profit—say, for example, based on size of gift and location—so that
it can better determine who is most receptive to its mission.  In this
case, size of gift and location are the “data” of the donor model.  If
the non-profit were to use this model, it would be identifying real
donors by first generating an abstract donor.   This is an example of
using Abstract Data Types.  Abstract Data Types both take into account
the Data Structure (i.e. the way in which data about donors is stored)
and provide the necessary operations on that structure.  In this course,
we will discuss the theoretical and practical aspects of algorithms and
Data Structures.  We will also learn to implement Data Structures and
algorithms in C/C++, analyze those algorithms, and consider both their
worst-case complexity and practical efficiency.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able
to:  

-   Identify elementary Data Structures using C/C++ programming
    languages.
-   Analyze the importance and use of Abstract Data Types (ADTs).
-   Design and implement elementary Data Structures such as arrays,
    trees, Stacks, Queues, and Hash Tables.
-   Explain best, average, and worst-cases of an algorithm using Big-O
    notation.
-   Describe the differences between the use of sequential and binary
    search algorithms.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband internet access  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader of Flash)  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.)  
  
 √    Be competent in the English language  
  
 √    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook.](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf)  
  
 √    Have completed [CS101: Introduction to Computer Science
I](http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs101/) and [CS102: Introduction to
Computer Science II](http://www.saylor.org/courses/cs102/).

### Course Information

Welcome to CS201.  Below, please find general information on this course
and its requirements.    
    
 **Course Designer:** Bhanu Kapoor  
    
 **Primary Resources:** This course is comprised of a range of different
free, online materials.  However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:  
  

-   CPlusPlus.com’s contents, such as [Arrays: Lesson
    I](http://www.cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/arrays/)
-   Oracle Think Quest Education Foundation’s contents, such as
    [Stacks](http://wayback.archive-it.org/3635/20130722193840/http://library.thinkquest.org/C005618/text/stacks.htm)
-   Cprogramming.com’s online contents, such as [*Quiz:
    Arrays*](http://www.cprogramming.com/tutorial/quiz/quiz8.html)
-   YouTube: XoaX.net’sprogramming videos, such as *[Linear & Binary
    Searching](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wNVCJj642n4)*

   
 **Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials. 
Pay special attention to unit 1, as this unit will lay the groundwork
for understanding the more advanced, exploratory material presented in
the later units.  You will also need to complete:  
              
             -The Final Exam  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your final exam. 
However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the materials in each unit.  
    
 In order to “pass” this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher
on the Final Exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as
you complete it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.  
    
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately **19 hours** to complete.  Each unit includes a “time
advisory” that lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on
each subunit.  These should help you plan your time accordingly.  It may
be useful to take a look at these time advisories and to determine how
much time you have over the next few weeks to complete each unit, and
then to set goals for yourself.  For example, unit 1 should take you 13
hours.  Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and decide to
complete subunits 1.1 and 1.2 (a total of 8 hours) on Monday and
Tuesday; subunits 1.3 (a total of 5 hours) on Wednesday; etc.  
    

